---
source_url: 'https://www.montclair.edu/red-hawk-central/registrar/add-drop/adjustments-and-withdrawals/'
source_title: ''
last_fetched: '2025-10-13T17:40:43Z'
lastmod: '2019-06-17T10:39:31-04:00'
bucket: 'registrar'
tags: ['registrar']
---

# Adjustments and Withdrawals

## **Adjustments**

Students may be eligible for an adjustment of financial aid, loan credits, or payments that exceed the charges on their student account. Adjustments generated by personal payments may be held up to 14 days to assure that the funds have cleared. Students will receive their refund either by direct deposit or paper check. We highly encourage students to sign up for direct deposit in order to receive refunds at a much faster pace!

### Direct Deposit for Student Adjustments

The University offers a secure direct deposit service through which students can have their adjustments deposited directly to the checking or savings account of their choice. This service enables quicker access to funds rather than waiting for a check to arrive through the mail.

Students may sign up for direct deposit of their student refund checks online via [NEST](https://www.montclair.edu/nest)

Note: Only U.S. bank accounts can be used for this service.

### Paper Check for Student Adjustments

Students who have not signed up for direct deposit will have their adjustments checks mailed to their current address on file. It is important students keep a current active address on file. If a valid address is not in the student system, the refund check can become lost or returned by the mail carrier.

## **Withdrawal**

The University reserves the right to terminate the enrollment of any student whose conduct, class attendance, academic record or financial obligation should prove unsatisfactory.

Once you have registered for classes, you are responsible for all charges associated with the semester.  If you decide not to attend any or all of your courses, you must officially withdraw through [NEST](https://www.montclair.edu/nest) or submit a written notice to the Registrar’s Office located in Red Hawk Central. Students that do not withdraw or take a leave of absence according to policy forfeits all rights to a refund or to a reduction in his/her account.  It is the student’s obligation to drop/withdraw from their classes. Students that drop/ withdraw and have received financial aid may have their aid returned to the appropriate agency.

## **Medical Withdrawal**

All medical appeals are handled through the Dean of Students. All pertinent paperwork must be presented to the Dean of Students Office which is located in the Student Center Room 400. A full or partial refund of tuition/fees and room/board may be granted with medical justification. You may also need to complete a formal assessment. The Dean will send a letter indicating whether or not your appeal has been approved and if you are eligible for reimbursement with the percentage that will be refunded to you. **Your tuition and fee adjustments will be determined using the effective date on your official documentation. Room and board adjustments will be prorated based on use of meal plan and time spend in housing.**The Dean of Students will inform the Office of Student Accounts. Please keep in mind any adjustments to your account may affect your aid. Any balance that results from a reduction in aid is the responsibility of the student.

Students considering withdrawal from the University should speak to a counselor and review the [Add/Drop Withdrawal web page](http://www.montclair.edu/red-hawk-central/managing-your-academic-life/add-drop/).

## **Room and Board Adjustments**

Students approved for a medical withdrawal by the Dean or Associate Dean of Students **may** be eligible to receive a prorated room and board adjustment based on the final occupancy date of the on-campus housing assignment. The student will be notified in writing by the Dean or Associate Dean approving the medical withdrawal with an effective date. The date that the student removes all personal belongings and returns the residence key/card, will determine the student’s eligibility for any room and board adjustment.

The Dean or Associate Dean of Students will inform the Office of Student Accounts, so it will not be necessary for you to submit an Appeal Letter or valid medical proof to the Office of Student Accounts. You will need to submit all paperwork to the Dean of Students office which is located in the Student Center, Room 400.  You may also need to complete a formal assessment. Please keep in mind any adjustments to your account may affect your aid.  Students that withdraw and have received financial aid may want to contact the Financial Aid Office at 973-655-4461 or [financialaid@montclair.edu](mailto:financialaid@montclair.edu). Some of your aid may need to be returned. Any balance that results from a reduction in aid is the responsibility of the student.